# l10n

`app/l10n` is module that extracts strings for translation from `.svelte`, `.js` and `.ts` files.

## Why did we choose this?

We initially used the [svelte-i18n-lingui](https://github.com/HenryLie/svelte-i18n-lingui) package for extracting and displaying the translations because:
- it had a clean syntax `$t~Hi ${name}~` which better than other systems using `t("Hi ${name}", { name: "Jack" })`
- it extracted strings from `.svelte` files most other libraries only support `.js` and `.ts`
- it offer interpolation for Svelte components and HTML e.g. `<p><T msg={~Click #~}><a>${$t~here~}</a></T></p>`. The `#` is replaced with `<a>` link.
- it generated unique IDs which made the keys much shorter and the need to think a new ID for each string.

~ is used instead of tidle in the docs because tidle cannot be escaped.

However later we had write our own module because:
- the translation had to be compiled to formats only readable by [lingui](https://lingui.dev). The format was much bigger and it was not human-readable.
- the format that included comments also included other unused data which made the locales directory really big.

## How does it work?

### Extractor

1. Run `yarn l10n:extract`
2. `app/l10n/extractor/extractor.ts` is called, which calls `extractStrings()`.
3. The current working directory is where is `app/`
4. The `include` and `exclude` fetched from `app/l10n/config.ts`. `include` is the glob pattern that specifies which files should be included in the extraction, right now it is `app/frontend` and `app/logic`. `exclude` are files that should be exclued which is set to `.d.ts` files now.
5. Reads each file from the files list after include and exclude.
6. Runs each `preprocessor` from `app/l10n/config.ts` so it is similar to the `vite.config.ts` process before the Svelte compiler processes it. Right now it is just the `conditionalCompile()` plugin because the `// #if [condition]` need to be removed otherwise there will errors during parsing.
7. Runs `svelteExtract()` in `app/l10n/extractor/svelteExtract.ts`.
8. Checks if it's an `.svelte` file
9. Runs the Svelte preprocessor and returns a preprocessed string. This runs with options listed in `app/svelte.config.js`
10. Runs the Svelte compiler on the preprocessed string and returns the AST
11. Walks the AST using `estree-walker-ts`
12. Runs `extractFromTaggedTemplate()` from `app/l10n/extractor/util.ts` when `$t` or `msg` are tagged template function found, it joins and replaces `Hi ${name}!` with `Hi {0}!` which is standard ICU message format.
13. It splits the string into two segments using the comment symbol set in `app/l10n/l10n.ts` which is `*=>`.
14. Creates an object for JSON generation.
15. Add the `id` field by generating an ID with `generateMessageID()` from `app/l10n/extractor/generateMessageID`. The `id` is generated using the first segment of the string before the comment symbol and second segment of the string after the comment symbol.
16. Adds the `message` field which the first segment before the comment symbol and `comment` which the second segment after the comment symbol. The other fields are for the metadata which is not used anymore.
17. Run `onMessageExtracted` from `app/l10n/extractor.ts` is called and pushes the object to a global object list which will be used for writing the output JSON file.
18. Runs `extractPlurals()` from `app/l10n/extractor/util.ts` when `$plurals()` are found it joins and replaces `$plural(day, { one: 'day', other: 'days'})` with `{num, plural, one {day} other {days}}` which is standard ICU message format.
19. Creates an JSON object.
20. Adds the `id` field by generating an ID using the formatted string with `generateMessageID()` and adds the formatted string to the `message` field. Note there are no comment field for this.
21. Run `onMessageExtracted` from `app/l10n/extractor.ts` is called and pushes the object to a global object list which will be used for writing the output JSON file.
22. Runs `extractPlurals()` from `app/l10n/extractor/util.ts` when `msgPlural()` which is the same as step 18-21.
23. Runs `tsExtract()` which is the same as step 7-22 but for `.js` and `.ts` files.
24. Runs `writeResults()`.
25. Reads the `sourceFile` which is source locale JSON file for existing strings, right now that is `en/messages.json`.
26. Writes the template JSON file in the source locale directory with the global string object array from step 17. `id` is used for the string object key, `message` is used for the `message` value and `comment` is used for the `description` value. The string objects are sorted by comparing the `message` in the locale order.
27. Writes the source JSON file in the source locale directory with the global string object array from step 17. `id` is used for the string key, `message` is used for the string value. The string objects are sorted by comparing the string value in the locale order.
28. Check if all locales in listed in `app/l10n/list.ts` have an JSON file and creates a file for the locale if there's no JSON file present.

### Displaying strings

1. When `$t` or `gt` is called, it replaces `${value}` with `{0}` for ICU message format interpolation. In `app/l10n/l10n.ts`. The passed string is from the tagged template function in the source code.
2. The `value` is replaced with an incremented number value e.g. `1`.
3. The string is split into two segments. The first segment is before the comment symbol and the second segment is after the comment symbol.
4. A message descriptor object is created with the following fields: `id` which is generated using the first and second segment, `defaultMessage` is the first segment and `description` is the second segment.
5. When `gPlural` or `$plural` is called, it transforms the variation in object into ICU message format string. E.g. `{ one: 'item', other: 'items' }` into `{num, plural, one {item} other {items}}`
6. A message descriptor object is created with the following fields: `id` is generated from the ICU message format string and `defaultMessage` is the ICU message format string. ``
7. `translateString` is called for both cases above. The message descriptor object is passed as the first parameter and any interpolated value or number value for plurals is passed to the second parameter.
8. Check if the local is loaded. If not it will get the local from local storage or using the browser locale. It sets the `messages` object which holds all the strings that will be used for display. If there are no messages any of the locales it will fallback to the source locale.
9. It gets the string using the `id` from the `messages` object. If there's no string present in the `messages` object it fallback to the `defaultMessage`.
10. The message is now passed to `@ultraq/icu-message-formatter` which formats the message using the ICU message format string. If it fails to format the message it will try to use the `defaultMessage` to format the message. If that fails as well it will return the plain string.

## Dependencies

### Vite preprocessor plugins

Vite preprocessor plugins in `vite.config.ts` must be also configured in `app/l10n/config.ts` because the Svelte compiler or TS parser would throw an error if it has an when parsing code that needs preprocessing. E.g. right now we have the `conditional-compile` plugin to process `// #if [condition]` statements and some of it includes removing duplicate imports.

### Svelte compiler and TS parser

The Svelte compiler compiles and TS parser reads the code and creates an AST. The strings are extracted from the AST instead of finding string using Regular Expressions because Regular Expressions are reliable if there are comments or in our case conditional compile.

### `@ultraq/icu-message-formatter`

This library is used to format ICU message format strings. It was chosen over other libraries because it was very lightweight. Other libraries were larger because they included additional features that were not needed.

## Debugging

### Error when extracting strings

#### Path, include or exclude not configured correctly

1. `console.log()` in the `extractStrings()` function in `app/l10n/l10n.ts` after the `glob()` call returns a list of files to be processed.
2. Verify that the files returned by `glob()` match the expected files based on the `include` and `exclude` patterns. Note that the `cwd()` is `app/` since that is where it will be called from.

#### Parse error

1. Check if the preprocessors are configured correctly in `app/l10n/config.ts` and that they are working correctly.
2. Check if the Svelte compiler is configured correctly in `app/l10n/l10n.ts`, updated and working correctly.

### Wrong string displayed or source locale string displayed

#### The display string key doesn't match the extracted string key

1. Find the extracted string in the source locale file.
2. Go to `app/l10n/l10n.ts` and `console.log` the `id` in the `gt` or `gPlural` function.
3. Check if the `id` matches the extracted string key in the source locale file and target locale file.
4. If the `id` doesn't match, verify that the string passed for ID generation matches the extracted string key in the source locale file.

#### The string is not translated

1. Find the string in the source locale file and get the key.
2. Find the key in the target locale file.
3. If the key is not found, translate the string in the target locale file.

#### The display locale is not updated

1. Go to `initLocale()` in `app/l10n/l10n.ts`.
2. `console.log()` the `locale`.
3. `console.log()` the `gt` or `gPlural` function when the string is returned.
4. Check if the `locale` is being updated correctly and before `translateString()` returns the translated string.

## Future improvements

### Using the existing Vite config or even Vite for extracting strings

It would be nice to use the existing Vite config or even Vite for extracting strings. That would be more reliable and we wouldn't need to think about setting the preprocessors twice, one for the build and one for extracting strings.

### Remove <T> Svelte component

We no longer use the `<T>` Svelte component for translation. It was originally used for the `<a>` in the About page.
